Plain Dosa and Dosa batter with video and step by step photos. This detailed dosa recipe post shows you how to make dosa batter in a mixer-grinder at home with a lot of tips and suggestions.

dosa recipe, dosa batter recipe, how to make dosa recipe
With the help of these tips, you will be easily able to make crispy, soft and tasty sada dosa which you are going to love.

What is Dosa and How is it made
Dosa also called as dosai (in Tamil language) is a famous South Indian breakfast or snack both in India as well as outside India. Dosa are basically rice and lentil crepes which are made with ground and fermented lentil-rice batter.

TRENDING VIDEO
   Rava Laddu
Play Video
The lentils and rice are soaked for 4 to 5 hours. They are then ground separately to a fine consistency. Both the lentil batter and the rice batter are mixed with salt. The batter is then allowed to ferment overnight or for 8 to 9 hours.

After the batter is fermented, the batter is poured on seasoned cast-iron pan or skillet (tawa) and spread like a pancake and cooked till crispy and golden.

Lentils used to make Dosa
The lentils used to make dosa are husked and split Black Gram. These are also known as Urad Dal in hindi. The other English names of urad dal are Black Matpe Bean, Mungo Bean and Vigna Mungo (botanical name).

Urad dal is available whole as well as split. To make dosa, you can use either the husked whole urad dal or the husked & split urad dal. Both these types of urad dal have an off-white color. The black husks on them have been removed.

Type of rice used to make Dosa
The rice used to make dosa can be a short or medium-grained white rice or parboiled idli rice.

A basic dosa recipe will just have the rice, urad dal and salt. The proportions for making dosa vary and by changing the proportions you can alter the texture by having a soft thick dosa to a thin dosa or a crispy dosa.

Addition of some more ingredients like flattened rice (parched rice or poha), different types of lentils also change the texture. The color also varies from being an opaque white to pale golden or reddish or golden.

Many readers ask me what is parboiled rice and idli rice. So I will mention it.

– parboiled rice is rice which is partially cooked in their husks. Later they are dried and milled. parboiled rice is used for making steamed rice, savory rice porridge (which we call kanji) and snacks too.
– idli rice is a type of parboiled rice and is used for making idlis or dosa. However, do note that you can also use only raw rice to make dosa. I personally prefer sona masuri or parmal rice.
– regular rice is polished white rice where their husk, bran and germ have been removed.

So we can sum up that there are many varieties of dosa that can be made with textures ranging from crisp to soft to fluffy to light. These varying textures are due to the proportion of the rice, urad dal and other ingredients used in the dosa batter recipe. That said, dosa can also be made with brown rice or hand-pounded rice.

About this Plain Dosa Recipe
Plain dosa is also called as Sada dosa. The word “sada’ means plain or simple. Truly so as this humble Sada dosa is served without the potato stuffing (potato masala). So you relish the dosa with just the coconut chutney and sambar.

The Sada Dosa recipe I am sharing here is what I generally make. The dosa batter recipe uses 3:0.75 proportion for rice and lentils respectively. Apart from rice I also add some flattened rice (poha) for softness and fenugreek seeds (to help in fermentation).

So this dosa recipe gives crisp as well as soft textured dosa. This is how we prefer dosa at home.

I have used a mix of idli rice and regular rice. But you can also just use idli rice. You can also use just regular rice. Both sona masuri and parmal rice also work well. In the video, I have shown making the sada dosa with idli rice only.

The dosa batter proportions, I have mentioned will finish up the whole batter in a day for a family of 3 to 4. In summers, I usually make this less proportion as the batter tends to get sour quickly. While in winters, I double the proportions.

I have also ground the rice and lentils together as this much quantity my mixer-grinder can accommodate without grinding them separately. But if you increase the proportions, then do grind the lentils and rice separately.

This is a foolproof tried and tested dosa recipe and you can easily scale the recipe. If doubling or tripling this dosa recipe, then soak urad dal + methi seeds in a separate bowl. Grind urad dal and methi seeds separately. Grind rice separately. Then mix both the batters in a large bowl or pan.

This dosa batter is a 2 in 1 batter as it can be used to make Idli, Uttapam and paniyaram. The best part of this dosa batter is that you can make the dosa thin, crisp as well as thick. It is up to you. I make both. With the same batter, you can make a variety of dosa.

Few Popular Dosa Varieties For You

Masala dosa
Set dosa
Ghee Roast Dosa
Ragi dosa
Cheese Dosa
 

dosa recipe crispy dosa
Tips for Dosa Batter Fermentation
Temperature: Do take into account the temperature of the city in which you live, as temperature is one of the important factors for proper fermentation.
Urad Dal:  Make sure that the urad dal you use is fresh and within its expiry date.
Salt: Use non iodized salt. I use rock salt. You can even use pink salt.
Rice: You can make this dosa recipe with only parboiled rice recipe (idli rice) or with a combination of idli rice and regular rice.
Tips for cooler climates:
Keep the batter bowl in a warm place – e.g near a heater or in a warm place in your kitchen.
You can also preheat your oven at a low temperature (80 to 90 degrees Celsius) for about 10 minutes. Then switch off the oven and keep the batter bowl inside – I use this method when it becomes very cold outside.
Alternatively, if your oven has lights, then keep the lights on and place the batter inside.
Addition a bit of sugar does help in fermenting the batter – I use this method at times in the winters here.
Skip adding salt to the batter as salt retards the fermentation process. Sometimes I add both salt and sugar together. I always use rock salt in the idli batter.
Keep the batter for a longer time, like 14 to 24 hours.
Do remember that even if you do not see the batter doubled or tripled, you should see tiny bubbles in the batter. You should also get the typical faint sour fermented aroma from the batter.
Adding ¼ to ½ tsp of instant yeast (dissolved in 2 to 3 tsp water) 30 to 45 minutes before you make the dosa also helps. But do this method when the batter has not fermented well. The downside of this method is that you have to use all the batter at once. If you refrigerate than the batter gets too yeasty.
You can also add ¼ to ½ baking soda and then ferment the batter in cold seasons.
Making Dosa Batter in a Wet Grinder vs Mixer-Grinder
According to me both the gadgets work well. For large batters, a table-top wet grinder (stone grinder) does a fabulous job. A mixie or mixer-grinder is good for small to medium quantities of batter. I have used both wet grinder as well as mixer-grinder.

For large quantities of batters, I do use a wet grinder, but lately I use mixer-grinder, as the one I have is too large and lifting and washing it is one big task. So I use my Preethi mixer-grinder (Blue Leaf platinum MG 139 750-watt) and it gives me good results every time. The batter does not become hot or warm.

If you plan to grind the batter in a wet grinder, then double or triple the proportions of the ingredients in the recipe. For a wet grinder, you will need to add some more water while grinding. The urad dal batter really becomes fluffy and light like whipped cream in a wet stone grinder.

Thus for ½ cup of urad dal, add 1.5 cups water. For 2 cups of rice, add 2.5 cups water. Add the water in parts when grinding urad dal, so that it becomes nicely fluffy and increases in volume.

After you have ground the urad dal, you don’t need to remove it. Just let the batter remain in the wet grinder. Add the rice and continue to grind.

How to season a pan or tawa for making any dosa variety
Another point to be considered is the use of a seasoned tawa or pan. If using a cast iron tawa, it has to be well seasoned. By seasoning I mean the pan is used often to make dosa. If you make roti on a tawa and use the same tawa, then there is a possibility that the dosa will stick.

To season a pan, heat the tawa or pan. Smear the pan with oil all over. Switch off the pan and keep aside for 2 to 3 days. Before making dosa, heat the pan. Remove the residue oil with a kitchen paper tissue. Again spread oil all over. Heat for some seconds and then again remove the oil. Again spread oil and use the pan for making dosa. If the pan is not seasoned, the dosa will stick. Cast iron pans are the best to make dosa. You can even make in a non-stick pan, but do try once making in a cast iron pan and you will notice the difference.

Do try this crispy dosa recipe and let me know. You can serve these dosai with coconut chutney, potato masala and sambar.

How to make Plain Dosa (Sada Dosa)
For ease of understanding I have divided this dosai recipe post into 3 main parts:

Step 1 – preparation for making dosa batter
Step 2 – making dosa batter in a mixie
Step 3 – making sada dosa from dosa batter
Step 1 – Preparation for making dosa batter

1. In a bowl take ½ cup idli rice or parboiled rice along with ½ cup regular rice. Instead of adding regular rice, you can also make the dosa with a total of 1 cup idli rice as I have shown in the video. The video has the recipe ingredients doubled in proportion.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
2. To the same bowl, add ¼ cup urad dal and ⅛ teaspoon methi seeds.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
3. Rinse the rice, lentils and methi seeds together a couple of times and keep aside.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
4. In a separate bowl, take 2 tablespoons poha (flattened rice).

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
5. Rinse poha once or twice in water and then add to the bowl containing the rinsed rice+lentils+methi seeds.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
6. Add 1.5 cups of water and mix. Cover with a lid and soak everything for 5 to 6 hours.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
Making Sada Dosa Batter
7. Drain all the water and add the soaked ingredients in a wet grinder jar.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
8. Add ⅔ to ¾ cup water and grind till you get a fine grainy consistency of rice in the batter. A smooth consistency of the batter is also fine. If the mixer gets heated up, then stop and wait for some minutes. When the mixer cools down, grind again. Depending on the jar capacity, you can grind everything once or in two batches. I ground in two batches and added overall ¾ cup water.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
9. Now take the batter in a large bowl or pan. In case the dosa batter becomes thin, then add a few tablespoons of rice flour to thicken it. Mix the rice flour very well in the batter.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
10. Add ½ teaspoon rock salt. Mix very well. Instead of rock salt, you can use non-iodized salt or sea salt crystals or himalayan pink salt. Cover and allow to ferment for 8 to 9 hours or more. Time of fermentation will vary depending on the temperature conditions. In winters, the time of fermentation can go up to 14 to 24 hours.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
11. The sada dosa batter after 11 hours. A proper fermentation will double or triple up the volume of the batter with a light sour aroma.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
12. Now lightly stir the batter, before you begin to make dosa. you will also see tiny air pockets in the batter.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
Making Sada Dosa from Dosa Batter
1. Heat a cast iron pan. When the pan becomes hot, spread ¼ to ½ teaspoon oil all over the pan. Do keep the flame on low to low-medium flame, so that you are easily able to spread the batter. If the pan base is very thick, then keep the flame to medium. For a low fat option, just make the dosa without any oil.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
2. Now take a ladle full of the dosa batter. Pour the batter and gently spread the batter starting from the center and moving outwards.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
3. Here is a neat round dosa.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
4. Cook the dosa on a low to medium flame. Do regulate the flame as per the pan size and thickness. You can even cover the dosa with a lid and let it get cooked from the base.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
5. When you see the batter on the top cooked, then sprinkle ¼ to ½ tsp oil on the edges and center.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
6. With the spoon spread the oil on the dosa.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
7. Cook till the base is nicely golden and crisp. The base will leave the pan when its gets cooked.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
8. Fold the sada dosa.

making dosa batter and dosa recipe
9. Serve Sada Dosa hot with coconut chutney, potato masala and sambar. It is best to serve this crispy dosa hot.

dosa recipe plain
This recipe post is from the archives (May 2016) and has been republished and updated on 4 June 2020.

If you made this recipe, please be sure to rate it in the recipe card below. If you want more delicious vegetarian Indian recipes delivered straight to your inbox, Sign Up for my email newsletter.

If you’re looking to brighten up your feed with beautiful, delicious and attainable Vegetarian Indian or World recipes, follow me on Instagram, Facebook, Youtube, Pinterest or Twitter.

Like this Recipe?
Pin it Now to Remember it Later

Pin Recipe Now

dosa recipe, dosa batter recipe
Dosa Recipe | Dosa Batter Recipe | Crispy Sada Dosa
4.77 from 17 votes
Dassana AmitBy Dassana Amit

This is a plain dosa or sada dosa recipe which is a famous breakfast or snack both in India as well as outside India. Dosa is basically healthy crepes made from ground rice and lentil batter which has been fermented.
 Save
 Pin
 Print
Prep Time
9 hrs
Cook Time
30 mins
Total Time
9 hrs 30 mins
Cuisine
South Indian
Course:
Breakfast
Difficulty Level:
Moderate
Servings
16
 to 18 dosa 
Units
Ingredients
▢½ cup idli rice or parboiled rice or 100 grams idli rice
▢½ cup regular rice or 100 grams regular rice
▢¼ cup urad dal or 50 grams urad dal (husked whole or split black gram)
▢⅛ teaspoon methi seeds or 2 pinches methi seeds (fenugreek seeds or methi dana)
▢2 tablespoon poha (flattened rice)
▢1.5 cups water for soaking both rice and lentils
▢¾ cup water for grinding - do add water as required
▢½ teaspoon rock salt (sendha namak) or non iodized salt or sea salt crystals or himalayan pink salt
▢oil as required
Instructions
Preparation For Making Dosa Batter
In a bowl take the idli rice or parboiled rice along with the regular white rice. Instead of adding regular rice, you can also make the dosa with a total of 1 cup idli rice as I have shown in the video. The video has the recipe ingredients doubled in proportion.
To the same bowl, add urad dal and fenugreek seeds.
Rinse the rice, lentils and methi seeds together a couple of times and keep aside.
In a separate bowl, take the poha.
Rinse it once or twice in water and then add rinsed poha to the bowl containing the rinsed rice+lentils+methi seeds.
Pour 1.5 cups water. Mix. Cover with a lid and soak everything for 5 to 6 hours.
Making Dosa Batter
Drain all the water and add the soaked ingredients in a wet grinder jar.
Add ⅔ to ¾ cup water and grind till you get a fine grainy consistency of rice in the batter. A smooth consistency of batter is also fine. 
If the mixer gets heated up, then stop and wait for some minutes. When the mixer cools down, grind again. Depending on the jar capacity, you can grind everything once or in two batches. I ground in two batches and added overall ¾ cup water.
Now take the batter in a large bowl or pan.
Add ½ tsp rock salt. Mix very well. Cover and allow to ferment for 8 to 9 hours or more. Time of fermentation will vary depending on the temperature conditions.
A proper fermentation will double or triple up the volume of the batter and you will see tiny air pockets in the batter with a light sour aroma.
Now lightly stir the batter, before you begin to make dosa.
Making Plain Dosa
Heat a cast iron pan. When the pan becomes hot, spread 1/4 to 1/2 tsp oil all over the pan. Do keep the flame on low to low-medium flame, so that you are easily able to spread the batter. If the pan base is very thick, then keep the flame to medium.
Do not spread oil if you are using a non stick pan, as you won't be able to spread the batter.
Now take a ladle full of the batter. Pour the dosa batter and gently spread the batter starting from the center and moving outwards.
Cook the dosa on a low to medium flame. Do regulate the flame as per the pan size and thickness.
When you see the batter on the top cooked, then sprinkle ¼ to ½ tsp oil on the edges and center.
With the spoon spread the oil on the dosa.
Cook till the base is nicely golden and crisp. The base will leave the pan when its gets cooked.
Fold and serve sada dosa hot. Make all dosai this way.
Serve these crisp plain dosa with sambar or potato masala or coconut chutney.
Video

Notes
Suggestions:
Scaling: You can easily halve, double or triple this sada dosa recipe. If doubling or tripling the dosa recipe, then soak urad dal + methi seeds in a separate bowl. Grind urad dal and methi seeds separately. Grind rice separately. Then mix both the batters in a large bowl or pan. Grind soaked rice in two to three batches.
Rice: Instead of adding regular rice, you can also make the dosa with total of 1 cup idli rice as I have shown in the video. The video has the recipe ingredients doubled in proportion.
Temperature: Do take into account the temperature of the city in which you live, as temperature is one of the important factors for proper fermentation.
Urad Dal:  Make sure that the urad dal you use is fresh and within its expiry date.
Salt: Use non-iodized salt. I use rock salt. You can even use pink salt.
Tips for dosa batter fermentation in cooler climates:
Keep the batter bowl in a warm place – e.g near a heater or in a warm place in your kitchen.
You can also preheat your oven at a low temperature (80 to 90 degrees Celsius) for about 10 minutes. Then switch off the oven and keep the batter bowl inside – I use this method when it becomes very cold outside.
Alternatively, if your oven has lights, then keep the lights on and place the batter inside.
Addition a bit of sugar does help in fermenting the batter – I use this method at times in the winters here.
Skip adding salt to the batter as salt retards the fermentation process. Sometimes I add both salt and sugar together. I always use rock salt in the idli batter.
Keep the batter for a longer time, like 14 to 24 hours.
Do remember that even if you do not see the batter doubled or tripled, you should see tiny bubbles in the batter. You should also get the typical faint sour fermented aroma from the batter.
Adding ¼ to ½ tsp of instant yeast (dissolved in 2 to 3 tsp water) 30 to 45 minutes before you make the dosa also helps. But do this method when the batter has not fermented well. The downside of this method is that you have to use all the batter at once. If you refrigerate than the batter gets too yeasty.
You can also add ¼ to ½ baking soda and then ferment the batter in cold seasons.
Making dosa batter in a wet-grinder:
Double the proportion of the dosa batter recipe if making in a wet grinder. So for ½ cup of urad dal, add 1.5 cups water. For 2 cups of rice, add 2.5 cups water. Add the water in parts when grinding urad dal, so that it becomes nicely fluffy and increases in volume.
2. After you have ground the urad dal, you don’t need to remove it. Just let the batter remain in the wet grinder. Add the rice and continue to grind.
Then remove the batter in a large bowl. Mix salt. Cover the bowl and let the batter ferment. 
Nutrition Info Approximate values
Nutrition Facts
Dosa Recipe | Dosa Batter Recipe | Crispy Sada Dosa
Amount Per Serving
Calories 74Calories from Fat 18
% Daily Value*
Fat 2g3%
Saturated Fat 1g6%
Sodium 75mg3%
Potassium 13mg0%
Carbohydrates 12g4%
Fiber 1g4%
Sugar 1g1%
Protein 2g4%
Vitamin B1 (Thiamine) 1mg67%
Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) 1mg59%
Vitamin B3 (Niacin) 1mg5%
Vitamin B6 1mg50%
Vitamin C 1mg1%
Vitamin E 1mg7%
Vitamin K 1µg1%
Calcium 6mg1%
Vitamin B9 (Folate) 1µg0%
Iron 1mg6%
Magnesium 3mg1%
Phosphorus 15mg2%
Zinc 1mg7%
* Percent Daily Values are based on a 2000 calorie diet.
